Add test-only cookbook (#1718)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/cookbooks/test-only.md

---
title: Filter the test suites to run
sidebar_position: 11
---

> The `test-only` parameter it is a useful option for when you only want to run a specific subset of tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `test-only` parameter is a useful option for when you only want to run a specific subset of tests.
```

Reviewer: I'd even be tempted to always call `test-only` an option here, since we only use it from the command line (and not through a `using` directive).
In which case:
```suggestion
The `--test-only` option is useful for when you only want to run a specific subset of tests.
```

> In this cookbook, we will walk through how to use the `test-only` parameter with the `test` sub-command in Scala CLI,

Reviewer: NIT as per the earlier comment
```suggestion
In this cookbook, we will walk through how to use the `--test-only` option with the `test` sub-command in Scala CLI,
```

specifically when using the `munit` and `utest` test frameworks.

## Filter the test suites

> The `test-only` parameter in Scala CLI supports using glob patterns to filter test suites to run. A glob pattern is a

Reviewer: NIT as per the earlier comment
```suggestion
The `--test-only` option in Scala CLI supports using glob patterns to filter test suites to run. A glob pattern is a
```

string which contains asterisk `*` characters to match a set of test suites.

> There are three examples of glob patterns how to filter test suites with the `test-only`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are three examples of glob patterns for how to filter test suites with `--test-only`:
```

- start with `test` - `test*`
- end with `test` - `*test`

> - contains `test` -  `*test*`

Reviewer 2: would the forth not be `.` I think . replaces a single char instead of * replacing 0+ ?

Author: ```
➜  scala-demo cat Test.scala 
//> using lib "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"

class Tests extends munit.FunSuite {
  test("foo") {
    assert(2 + 3 == 5)
  }
}
➜  scala-demo scala-cli test .  -- '*foo' 

Tests:
  + foo 0.039s
➜  scala-demo scala-cli test .  -- '*fo.' 

Tests:
```

In my tests `.` isn't matched to any character.

Reviewer 2: Huh, so `scala-cli test .  -- 'MyTests.foo'` it's the only option to use the dot ?

Author: Yes, it seems that `.` isn't treated as a special character.

:::note

> The `test-only` is supported for every test frameworks running in Scala CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--test-only` option is supported for every test framework running with Scala CLI.
```

:::

> For example, passing `tests.only*` to the `--test-only` runs only test suite which start with `tests.only`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, passing `tests.only*` to the `--test-only` runs only test suites which start with `tests.only`:
```

> For example, passing `tests.only*` to the `--test-only` runs only test suite which start with `tests.only`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, passing `tests.only*` to the `--test-only` option runs only the test suites which start with `tests.only`:
```

```scala title=BarTests.scala
//> using lib "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"
package tests.only

class BarTests extends munit.FunSuite {
  test("bar") {
    assert(2 + 3 == 5)
  }
}
```

```scala title=HelloTests.scala
package tests

class HelloTests extends munit.FunSuite {
  test("hello") {
    assert(2 + 2 == 4)
  }
}
```

```bash
scala-cli test . --test-only 'tests.only*' 
# tests.only.BarTests:
#   + bar 0.045s
```

<!-- Expected:
tests.only.BarTests:
+ bar
-->

## Running a single test case by name

:::note

> It's important that the test frameworks may have their own specific API for specifying the test cases to run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test frameworks may have their own specific API for specifying the test cases to run aside from the test-only input.
```

:::

### Munit

> To run a specific test cases inside the test suite pass `*test-name*` as an argument to `scala-cli`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a specific test case inside a test suite pass `*test-name*` as an argument to `scala-cli`:
```

<!-- clear -->

```scala title=MunitTests.scala
//> using lib "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"
package tests.only

class Tests extends munit.FunSuite {
  test("bar") {
    assert(2 + 2 == 5)
  }
  test("foo") {
    assert(2 + 3 == 5)
  }
  test("foo-again") {
    assert(2 + 3 == 5)
  }
}
```

```bash
scala-cli test .  -- '*foo*'
# tests.only.Tests:
#   + foo 0.045s
#   + foo-again 0.001s
```

<!-- Expected:
tests.only.Tests:
+ foo
+ foo-again
-->

> This will run only the test which contains the name `foo`, and any other tests in your test suite will be skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will only run the test which contains the name `foo`; any other tests in your test suite will be skipped.
```

### Utest

Unfortunately, the `utest` test framework doesn't support using glob pattern `*` to filter the test cases to run. In

> order to run specific test case you will need to specify the exact names of the test you want to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
order to run aspecific test case you will need to specify the exact name of the test you want to run.
```

<!-- clear -->

```scala title=MyTests.scala
//> using lib "com.lihaoyi::utest::0.7.10"

import utest._

object MyTests extends TestSuite {
  val tests = Tests {
    test("foo") {
      assert(2 + 2 == 4)
      println("Hello from " + "tests")
    }
    test("bar") {
      assert(2 + 2 == 4)
      println("Hello from " + "tests")
    }
  }
}
```

```bash
scala-cli test .  -- 'MyTests.foo'
# -------------------------- Running Tests MyTests.foo --------------------------
# Hello from tests
# + MyTests.foo 8ms  
# Tests: 1, Passed: 1, Failed: 0
```

<!-- Expected:
Running Tests MyTests.foo
Hello from tests
+ MyTests.foo
Tests: 1, Passed: 1, Failed: 0
-->

> This will run only the test with the name of `MyTests.foo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will run only the test case with the name `MyTests.foo`.
```
